---
title: "Weeknotes S1E2: A week of realising it’s all about the people (again)"
category: weeknotes
image: /content/lizard-on-space-shuttle.jpeg
excerpt: |
    Our protagonist once again learns that technical challenges are easy to solve
    but the persistent problems are the ones involving people.
---

I’m going to mix it up a bit and try and group my weeknotes by topic rather than
by day. That way you can only read the interesting sections and skip the boring
ones. How do you know which sections are interesting? Well, [obviously you read
all the sections first, and then only read the good
ones](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_OirA3zGNw).

![The Data Monitor (formerly Salamander of Despair) rides our new NASA mascot
into a glorious future.](/content/lizard-on-space-shuttle.jpeg)

## Defra: Making Data Findable

Defra’s Making Data Findable project is all about providing Defra group with a
world class data discovery tool that reaches across all of Defra’s agencies and
bodies. This week we had outputs from the last round of user research summarised
by Paul, highlighting his main findings and the problems Defra staff are having
with data. It’s a really interesting set of results and goes way beyond just
Making Data Findable, and has implications for how we implement Defra’s data
strategy.

In particular for me it highlighted that **users don’t just want to find good
data, they want to find an expert who understands the data that they can have a
conversation with**. This idea of “surfacing the experts” is something I think
has a lot of implications — firstly, the UX needs to attach greater prominence
to contact information, highlighting who the key people involved with a dataset
is. Secondly, there needs to more effort applied to getting contact information
up-to-date in metadata and keeping it up-to-date — staff churn of data owners
was cited as a serious problem because users don’t know who owns the data
anymore. This is a process thing but it also means that however we use Making
Data Findable to encourage owners to improve metadata quality, people associated
with a data set need to be a priority.

It also suggests we might want to investigate other ways to **help users “find
data experts”** — not just search but also more passive “browsing” of blog-style
content that links domain experts with the datasets they recommend. It’s not the
first time people have thought of this but now there’s some motivation to back
it up. It’s a more direct encoding of the network of trust wherein people trust
datasets because experts recommend them. This sort of thing is very common in
scientific domains, which I was learning about from Hannah at the Grant Museum
last week, and it would be interesting to explore where we could enable it here.

We also had a Team Excellence session run by our new delivery manager [Andrew
G](https://twitter.com/agodleman). As a team we decided we’d like to be more
like NASA, so we adopted them as our model team. I learnt that all of my team
mates are considerably more interesting than I am! They’ve been movie stars,
musicians, athletes and black-belts, and the session really helped me understand
better them as people and what’s important to them at work. I also realised that
when I’m at my computer I’m a terrible listener and I pay more attention to my
screen that the person talking, so I’m going to improve that. If you catch me
doing it, tell me off!

## Defra: Authoritative data
As research has continued into Defra’s reference data sources, we’ve realised
the issues we’re encountering are much broader than we originally imagined.
We’ve also realised that calling something reference data is somewhat a matter
of perspective, and not all the people we’ve done research with have connected
with the term. So for now we’re using the words “shared authoritative data” to
talk about what we’re looking at.

This week we spoke to some Rural Payments Agency (RPA) colleagues about their
issues sourcing, processing and sharing geospatial data in the form of “data
products”. We saw a real spectrum of datasets in terms of incentives for
quality: land use data is some of the highest quality data around because
there’s strong economic incentives to have robust quality processes, whereas
some other datasets don’t have the same sort of resource and therefore aren’t
kept up-to-date, which has an impact on downstream users referring to it.

When we make Discovery recommendations we’ll need to make sure that there’s a
way for the business to show that a custodian is empowered to maintain the data
they own — without that, they can’t be a custodian. We’ll need to think hard
about whether that means the responsibilities of data owners needs to be split,
and if there’s anywhere else in the organisation that’s already operating like
this.

## Defra: Data Target Operating Model
This week I got to contribute to technical part of Data Target Operating Model
(TOM) which will be a “go-to guide” for what good technology and data practice
looks like for our data services.

Obviously this draws extensively on Defra’s existing architecture practices, but
also calls out important elements from the Data Strategy and Technology Code of
Practice, like the use of open standards for data and the need for explicit data
architecture input.

It’s only a first draft but I’m glad that when people are making new services in
the future we’ll be asking the right questions for them to realise data is
important and help them get it right.

## Conclusion
Outside of providing consulting services to Defra around data transformation,
I’ve also had lots of chats about data literacy and what Government should be
doing about data infrastructure, motivated by some great discussions at last
weekend’s [UKGovCamp](https://www.ukgovcamp.com/) (which
[we](https://register-dynamics.co.uk)
[sponsored](https://www.ukgovcamp.com/sponsors)!).

As with everything I’ve been doing this week, the conclusions of the discussions
are consistent about one thing — it’s not about the tech, and it’s all about the
people.
